The Project Gutenberg eBook of A Short Treatise on Head Wear, Ancient
and Modern, by Anne C Goater

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: A Short Treatise on Head Wear, Ancient and Modern

Author: Anne C Goater

Illustrator: Walter H Goater

Release Date: June 16, 2021 [eBook #65624]

Language: English

Produced by: Fay Dunn, Fiona Holmes, and the Online Distributed
             Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
             produced from images generously made available by The
             Internet Archive/American Libraries.)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A SHORT TREATISE ON HEAD
WEAR, ANCIENT AND MODERN ***



Transcriber’s Notes.

Page 10 — changed Shirrifs to Sharifs.
Page 17 — The word Tiara added to Pope’s Ti (Pope’s Tiara).
The positioning of the 17 illustrations has been changed slightly
to accommodate each one between paragraphs, on every second page.




[Illustration]




  Copyrighted, 1885,
  By R. DUNLAP & CO.

  LOCKWOOD PRESS, 126 & 128 Duane St., New York.

[Illustration]


  A SHORT TREATISE

  ON

  * HEAD * WEAR *

  ANCIENT AND MODERN,

  ILLUSTRATED BY

  Walter H. Goater.




Head Wear, Ancient and Modern.


Tracing the history of man as far back as we can under civilized
conditions of life, we find that in one form or another he has made use
of some artificial contrivance to protect his head.

Nature, in her bounty, seems to have provided in part against the
necessity of the hat, by giving to the head a thick and abundant
covering of hair, but, instead of considering this as an indication
that the head required no other protection, mankind seems rather to
have regarded it as a hint to keep this most important part of the body
well covered.

The hat being the most conspicuous article of dress, and surmounting
all the rest, it is only natural to find that from the earliest times
special care and attention has been given to its adornment—showy
plumes, rare jewels and rich bands of gold and silver being used at
different periods to decorate it.

Its form and frequently its color have also been made to designate the
rank and character of the wearer: As the Monarch by his crown, the
Cardinal by his red hat, which betokens his readiness to spill his
blood at any time for the sake of Christ, and the court fool by his cap
with bells. In one form it serves to designate the military officer,
in another the peaceful Quaker or the quiet man of letters.

[Illustration:

  _Fig 1._  _Fig 2._
  _Fig 3._  _Fig 4._  _Fig 5._
  _Fig 6._  _Fig 7._
]

The materials employed in the manufacture of hats have been various,
stuffs of every kind and color having entered into their composition.
The birds have been robbed of their brilliant plumage, the beasts of
the field of their wool and hair. Amphibious creatures have yielded
their fur, while the mines of the earth have given up precious metals
and stones. All these have been used by man to make a suitable covering
for his august head. Felt hats are by far the most ancient, silk hats
being of quite recent introduction. They were known in Florence about a
century ago, but were not introduced into France until 1825.

Tradition ascribes the discovery of felting to St. Clement. It occurred
in this manner: While on one of his charity missions, becoming weary
and foot-sore, he took off his sandals to ease his feet, which were
all bruised from long walking over rough roads. While resting by the
wayside an opportunity was afforded him of rescuing a little lamb from
the cruel clutches of a wily fox that was pursuing it. The grateful
little creature jumped round him and licked his hand for joy, and it
was in fondling it that St. Clement observed some loose wool, which he
gathered.

While carelessly handling it the thought suddenly struck him that it
would be good to bind up the wounds on his feet with. No sooner was
it thought than done, and he found it so soothing that he immediately
resumed his journey.

[Illustration:

  _Fig 8._  _Fig 9._
  _Fig 10._  _Fig 11._  _Fig 12._
  _Fig 13._  _Fig 14._  _Fig 15._
]

At night when he came to remove his sandals he was surprised to find,
instead of fine, soft wool, a piece of cloth, so firm and thick that he
could not pull it apart. This was called felt, and St. Clement was
made the patron saint of the craft. (However, it is only fair to state
that, according to some authorities, there is abundant evidence to show
that felting was known to the ancients long before the time of St.
Clement or the Christian era.)

       *       *       *       *       *

The most ancient form of head wear we find to be the cap such as is
seen on figures representing the goddess of liberty. Hoods, also, of
various shapes, date back long before hats appeared, the latter for
a long time only being employed as an article of extra clothing in
winter, worn over the hood or when going on a journey.

       *       *       *       *       *

Among the ancient Egyptians very peculiar shaped caps were worn, like
from Figures 1 to 7. Some of them would rise to a great height above
the head, and then descend very low upon the chest in the shape of
lappets. Those of the priests and of their attendants were often loaded
with a profusion of symbolical decorations, composed of feathers, lotus
leaves and other natural products.

In religious processions it was common to wear masks that covered the
whole head and neck down to the shoulders. These represented the heads
and busts of various sacred animals, such as the ibis, hawk, bull, dog
and ram.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration:

  _Fig 16._  _Fig 17._
  _Fig 18._  _Figs 19 & 20._  _Fig 21._
  _Fig 22._  _Fig 23._
]

Our modern hat can be traced back to the _pileus_ worn by the ancient
Greeks when on a journey. Hats with brims were also worn by them,
though some authorities claim that the Greek citizen of mature years
never wore a head-covering, it being confined to youths, workmen and
slaves. The _pileus_ was a closely-fitting woolen skull-cap, which was
sometimes worn as a lining to the helmet. It was adopted by the Romans
at their public games and festivals by those who had once been slaves,
and by the aged and infirm for sake of warmth.

From ancient coins and medals we find that the Romans went bareheaded,
except at sacred rites, games, festivals, and when at war.

Baldness was looked upon by them as a great deformity, and Cæsar,
mighty conqueror though he was, yet could not make nature add one
single hair to his very scanty supply, is said to have prized the honor
of wearing a laurel crown above all the other dignities conferred upon
him by the senate, as it served to conceal his weakness.

In the city, to screen themselves from the heat, rain or wind, the
Romans frequently threw the folds of their robe over their heads, but
if they met any one to whom they owed respect, they immediately let the
folds drop and remained bareheaded.

Figs. 10 and 12 are specimens of ancient Greek helmets, while Fig.
11 represents a young warrior equipped for battle. Fig. 8 shows the
_petasus_, not greatly unlike our tennis hat of to-day. Fig. 14 is the
Phrygian bonnet, which held its own for so many centuries.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration:

  _Fig 24._  _Fig 25._
  _Fig 26._  _Fig 27._  _Fig 28._
  _Fig 29._  _Fig 30._
]

The inhabitants of Eastern nations always have their heads covered. In
China the men wear hats in shape and size resembling large umbrellas,
like Figs. 18 and 23, or else small conical caps similar to Fig. 17.
These are made of beautifully wrought cane-work and often have pictures
of birds and flowers painted upon them. They also have another cap,
which though richer in material is not so graceful. It is similar in
shape to Fig. 22, made of black velvet with a blue silk centre and
a red tassel surmounting the top. The distinctive mark of different
ranks among the mandarins consists in the color and value of the button
worn on the cap. Figs. 19 and 20 show the peculiar head-dress worn by
the Japanese when going forth to battle. In Arabia, notwithstanding
the heat of the climate, the men wear a most preposterous head-dress.
Frequently fifteen cloth or linen caps are worn one over the other, the
upper one being gorgeously embroidered in gold with a sentence from the
Koran worked upon it. Not satisfied with this curious coiffure they
add to it by wrapping around the outer cap a large piece of muslin
ornamented at the ends with silk or golden fringe, which stream loosely
on the shoulders.

A plume of white heron’s feathers is the distinctive badge of a chief
among the Uzbek Tartars.

Throughout the East the turban is generally worn, its height being a
mark to denote the rank of the wearer. In color it is generally of
the most brilliant hue, and of richly embroidered materials. Great
taste and ingenuity are exercised in the manner of twisting it around
the head so as to make the folds appear as graceful as possible. The
different turbans on page 9 give some idea of the various shapes they
can be made to assume.

Emirs or Sharifs, descendants of Mohammed’s daughter, are alone allowed
the high honor of adorning their heads with green turbans.

[Illustration:

  _Fig 31._
  _Fig 32._  _Fig 33._  _Fig 34._
  _Fig 35._  _Fig 36._
]

On page 11 we have some types of African head-dress, Figs. 31, 32
and 34 showing what the natives of that dark continent have done for
themselves in the way of head adornment, entirely unaided by fashion
or the knowledge of what their brothers in other parts of the world
were wearing. Fig. 33, though of Asiatic origin and finer workmanship,
is quite as grotesque in design as anything the wild tribes of Africa
could devise.

At one time the Turks had a law by which none but themselves could
wear turbans of rich texture. Their Greek subjects were condemned
to wear dark cotton caps as a mark of their servitude. Armenians
were compelled to appear in ridiculous-looking balloon-shaped caps,
while the Jews were only permitted to wear brimless caps resembling
inverted flower-pots. Later on, the Sultan issued a decree that all
of his subjects should wear a red fez instead of their turbans. This
law was received with the most determined and indignant opposition.
So obnoxious to their feelings was this change, that the discontented
party set fire to the houses of all those who favored it, and though
finally the Sultan’s wishes passed into a law, it was years before many
of his subjects became reconciled to it. Fig. 40 shows a turban worn
by one of the Sultans; Fig. 41, the fez of the people. Figs. 37, 38,
42 and 43 on the same page are samples of Russian hats. In some parts
of that country the head-covering of the people is made of birch bark
and plaited grasses; but fur is the material most commonly used. The
prevailing male head-dress of the inhabitants of Asia Minor appears
to be the Phrygian bonnet, of which the characteristic features with
them are its point on top, bent forward, and its long flaps descending
on the shoulders. This style of hat was worn for many centuries, and
traveled as far west as Venice, where the Doge always wore one.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration:

  _Fig 37._  _Fig 38._
  _Fig 39._  _Fig 40._  _Fig 41._
  _Fig 42._  _Fig 43._
]

As a part of defensive armor the hat became the helmet, which has
changed but little in shape from the earliest times. Very elaborate and
fantastic were some of the early forms, with their double or two-story
heads, Figs. 46 and 47, to give the impression of increased height.
The workmanship, also, was very beautiful, some of the ancient helmets
being entirely covered with chasing and designs of the most intricate
character. With the Greeks and Romans the subject of armor was one of
importance, and from their ancient monuments we can learn much of their
form and beauty. Page 15 shows several kinds of helmets worn during the
middle ages.

       *       *       *       *       *

In Spain serious disturbances took place in Madrid in the eighteenth
century over an attempt being made to banish the _sombrero_. While
in other countries the fashion of hats has been undergoing changes,
in Spain the same shapes are worn year after year, with but little
modification. Page 19, with the exception of Figs. 52 and 53, which
are Mexican, show several forms of Spanish hats. Fig. 51 is the style
commonly worn by the priests when traveling about.

Page 21 gives some German types; Fig. 61 is the hat of a judge; Figs.
58, 60 and 62 are military hats, while Fig. 63 shows a Teutonic fool’s
cap decorated with bells.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration:

  _Fig 44._
  _Fig 45._  _Fig 46._  _Fig 47._  _Fig 48._
  _Fig 49._
]

In France the clothing of the head has long been a subject of special
consideration, and many have been the styles that have emanated from
there. At first, as in most of the other countries mentioned, hoods
were worn, but when Charles VII. made his triumphal entry into Rouen,
in 1449, he wore a hat lined with red velvet and surmounted with a
rich plume of feathers. From this date hats and caps became general
throughout France.

A curious appendage that was worn with the hat for many years was like
Fig. 66, consisting of a piece of black stuff which was fastened to one
side of the hat, the other end being thrown over the left shoulder.
This band was often held in the hand and the hat allowed to fall off
from the head and rest on the back.

Another peculiar head-dress was the Capuchin hood, Fig. 68. This had a
long pointed tail that hung down the back, and in front was buttoned
close up to the chin. Some gallants twisted the tails into all sorts
of fantastic forms and carelessly poised them on the top of the head.
With the shaven faces that were always worn with this hood, the men
all looked very much like monks. It was fear of this appearance that
induced Francis I. to set the fashion of velvet caps in his kingdom.
Fig. 67 represents a French military hat. For the past fifty years the
high silk hat has been the most popular style in France.

At one time there was a law in France which compelled all bankrupt Jews
to wear a green hat, so that people might avoid losses by trading with
them. The slang expression “Do you see anything green about me,” is
said to have derived its origin from this circumstance.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration:

  RUSSIAN.
  PRINCE OF WALES. ** FRENCH.
  POPE’S TIARA. ** ENGLISH. ** SULTAN’S TIARA.
  DUKE’S. ** AUSTRIA.
  GERMAN.
]

The early Anglo-Saxons for years wore no other covering for their heads
than their long flowing hair, which they sedulously cultivated. When
they did take to a covering, about the eighth century, it was in the
form of a cap made most likely from the undressed skin of animals. The
Britons, at the time of the invasion of Cæsar, wore on their heads a
conical hat, which derived its name from the cabin or hut in which they
lived, it strongly resembling it in shape. Helmets, with a projecting
piece in front called a nasal, were worn by the early Briton warriors.
The nasal was afterward discarded, as it was found to afford too
convenient a hold to the enemy of the wearer, Stephen, at the siege
of Lincoln, having been seized by the nasal of his helmet and held a
prisoner.

It was not until after the Norman conquest that the use of hats became
general in England. “A hatte of bever” was worn by some one of the
nobles met at Clarendon about the middle of the twelfth century, and in
the “Canterbury Tales” we hear mention of the merchant wearing on his
head a “Flaunderish bever hat.”

In the fourteenth century we find a very peculiar kind of head-gear
popular in England, Figs. 70 and 72. First, on the head is a
close-fitting skull-cap, which is encircled by a roll of cloth, flat
like a band, or twisted turban-wise. Above is another piece of cloth,
cut and clipped around the edges in all manner of queer shapes, the
whole falling around the head in a confused manner. Such hoods were
worn by the ancient Knights of the Garter, and are said to have been
borrowed from Italy.

It is in this same century that for the first time in England we find
a feather in the hat, Fig. 75. It was stuck in perfectly straight in
front, as they had not as yet acquired any grace in its adjustment.

[Illustration:

  _Fig 50._  _Fig 51._
  _Fig 52._  _Fig 53._  _Fig 54._
  _Fig 55._  _Fig 56._]

During the reign of Queen Elizabeth a great variety of hats and caps
were worn. They were mostly made of velvet and richly decorated with
jewels, bands of gold or silver lace and feathers. A writer of that
time describes them thus: “They wear them sharpe on the crowne, peaking
up like the speare or shaft of a steeple, standing a quarter of a yard
above the crowne of the head. Some others are flatte and broade on
the crowne like the battlements of a house. Another sort have round
corners, sometimes with one sort of band, sometimes another; now black,
now white, now russet, now red, now green, now yellow, now this, now
that—never content with one color or fashion two days to an end; and
thus they spend the Lord’s treasure consuming their golden years and
silver days in wickedness and sin.” Those must have been glorious days
for the hatter when the fashions changed so rapidly that men were
obliged to buy a new hat every two or three days.

During this same reign laws were made compelling the lower classes to
wear on the Sabbath a cap of peculiar shape and make.

The escape of Lord Nithsdale from the Tower, in the early part of the
eighteenth century, was principally effected by the large riding-hoods
worn at that time, which he put on, along with his wife’s dress and
cloak. Such hoods were ever after called Nithsdales.

On page 25 are pictures of some of the early forms of English hats.
Figs. 76 and 78 belonged to the clergy. Fig. 77 is a Scottish bonnet.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration:

  _Fig 57._  _Fig 58._
  _Fig 59._  _Fig 60._  _Fig 61._
  _Fig 62._  _Fig 63._]

The Puritans discarded all ornament of any kind from their dress and
wore the steeple hat, high and narrow in the crown, with a broad brim
(Fig. 83). The Cavalier of the same era wore a low, broad-crowned hat
with a feather stuck on one side. The principal changes that have taken
place in hats from time to time have been in the height of the crown
and in the width of the brim. As this latter became wider it led to the
device of looping it up, and thus originated the cocked hat that was
worn during the eighteenth century.

To all Americans this hat brings patriotic recollections of
revolutionary days—for Washington and his generals all wore cocked
hats. On page 27, Fig. 85, we have the hat of the “Minute Man.” Also
one worn, Fig. 79, during the good old Knickerbocker days. Fig. 84
shows the style of hat worn by Kossuth when on a visit to this country
in 1851. Previous to this time the only hat made for gentlemen was
the high silk hat and cloth caps for boys, but a few weeks after
Kossuth’s appearance in the country thousands of hats similar to his
were sold, the demand for them being universal. Since then soft and
stiff felt hats have been brought to perfection in quality and style
in this country far superior to any made abroad. This was shown in
our Centennial Exhibition, in 1876, by Dunlap & Co. receiving the
first prize for their productions over all competition of foreign and
domestic manufactures. Figs. 86, 87, 88 are three different styles
of high hats worn about fifty years ago. In the latter part of the
eighteenth century the gaudy ornaments of lace, jewels, feathers, &c.,
gradually began to disappear from hats, giving place to the sober black
band and simple buckle, and when that, too, had its day and passed
away, the hats of men were left without any ornament, but in much
better taste and more in keeping with their use than were those of old.

[Illustration:

  _Fig 64._  _Fig 65._
  _Fig 66._  _Fig 67._  _Fig 68._
  _Fig 69._]

Hats have not only been used for the practical purpose of covering the
head, but from remote time have played their part in many important
actions in life. Among the Romans the hat was the symbol of liberty,
and slaves were presented with one on receiving their freedom. The
Quaker hat dates from the origin of the sect in the middle of the
seventeenth century, Fig. 80. After the assassination of Cæsar
coins were issued by Brutus and Cassius, on which was represented a
cap between two daggers. Even at a later period the hat or cap was
identified with liberty as in the republic of the Netherlands. After
the emancipation from Spain a hat became their national emblem, while
we all know the part Gessler’s hat played in gaining for the Swiss
their freedom. The common practice of doffing the hat when meeting
a friend is thought to be a modification of the ancient custom of
unclothing some part of the body when in the presence of one to whom
respect was due.

Many persons profess that from the dress alone they can give you a true
estimate of the character of the man.

While this is, perhaps, expressing it rather strongly, it is certainly
true that the material and style of one’s dress does, to a large
degree, denote the wearer’s character; and especially is this so of
hats and the manner in which they are worn.

[Illustration:

  _Fig 70._  _Fig 71._  _Fig 72._
  _Fig 73._  _Fig 74._  _Fig 75._
  _Fig 76._  _Fig 77._  _Fig 78._]

The man of refined tastes will always be found to be very fastidious
in regard to his head wear, buying only the finest quality of hat,
while a coarse nature will be satisfied with a cheap slouch hat. The
prosperous business man also can generally be picked out by his hat, it
being something substantial and good of its kind, while the man of mean
and parsimonious habits will usually have a hat to correspond with his
dwarfed nature.

  “Have a good hat; the secret of your looks
  Lives with the beaver in Canadian brooks;
  Virtue may flourish in an old cravat,
  But man and nature scorn the shocking hat.”

[Illustration:

  _Fig 79._  _Fig 80._  _Fig 81._
  _Fig 82._  _Fig 83._  _Fig 84._
  _Fig 85._  _Fig 86._  _Fig 87._  _Fig 88._]

We have now followed a few of the changes that hats have undergone from
the earliest times to the present, and would bring our remarks to a
close with a notice of the house of R. Dunlap & Co., which was founded
by Mr. Robert Dunlap in 1857, who opened a small store November 14, at
557 Broadway, between Spring and Prince streets, and by originality
of designs and selling the finest class of hats, he soon became the
popular hatter of the city. Two years later, in 1859, Mr. Paran
Stevens, the Napoleon of hotel-keepers, induced Mr. Dunlap to occupy
a store under the Fifth Avenue Hotel, which was just then completed,
and who desired only those as tenants who sold the best goods in their
line. At this time the hotel, situated at the corner of Twenty-third
street and Fifth avenue, was considered very far up town, and it was
predicted that Dunlap’s venture would be a failure; but the young and
enterprising hatter soon became the leading hatter of the country.
The firm remained there for twelve years, and then removed to their
present location, at 178 and 180 Fifth avenue. Finding the demand for
their hats increasing from the residents of Brooklyn, Jersey City and
surrounding suburbs, in 1876 they moved their store from 557 to 179
Broadway, near Cortlandt street, as their down-town store.


[Illustration: FALL STYLES, 1885.

  N^o 52.
  N^o 52.  N^o 53.
  N^o 53.

PRICE OF SILK HATS, $8.00.
In Ordering give Number.]


[Illustration: FALL STYLES, 1885.

  N^o 56.
  N^o 54.  N^o 55.
  N^o 55.

STIFF HATS, IN BLACK AND BROWN, $5.00.
In Ordering give Number.]


[Illustration: FALL STYLES, 1885.

  N^o 57 STIFF.
  N^o 58 SOFT.  N^o 59 SOFT.
  N^o 58 SOFT.
  SOFT HATS, IN
  BLACK AND BROWN.

In Ordering give Number and state price of Hat desired.]


[Illustration: FALL STYLES, 1885.

  N^o 63.
  N^o 60.
  N^o 61.
  N^o 62.

SOFT POCKET-HATS, IN BLACK, BROWN AND BLUE.
In Ordering give Number.]

The popularity of the Dunlap hat induced the firm to increase their
manufacturing facilities by the erection of a large factory on Seventh
avenue, New York, where all the silk and opera hats are made, and a
straw-hat factory at 132 and 134 South Fifth avenue, New York, and also
the erection of one of the largest and most complete felt hat factories
in this country at the corner of Park and Nostrand avenues, Brooklyn.

The growing demand for these hats in the West induced the firm to open
a branch store under the Palmer House, Chicago, about three years ago,
which has proved a grand success; also, quite recently, they have
opened an elegant store on Chestnut street, Philadelphia. Besides their
own stores in New York, Chicago and Philadelphia, their celebrated hats
are sold by authorized agents in all the principal cities of the United
States, where the patrons of the Dunlap hat can purchase their hats of
the same style, quality and price as sold by them in their own stores.




[Illustration]


[Illustration]

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A SHORT TREATISE ON HEAD WEAR,
ANCIENT AND MODERN ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
